# Configuration ELISE — INDIGO

These issues could also be seen as a problem of the configuration of ELISE in INDiGO. By design, ELISE does allow for the possibility to change, for example, the behaviour and weight of different search criteria. In the INDiGO implementation this is however not the case, and so for such less experienced users it is clear that the graphical user interface does not seem to offer much help in formulating effective queries. Essentially then, the ELISE component has no control on the GUI — neither how queries are specified nor how results are displayed. Learning to use the tools is mainly accomplished by getting help from colleagues or simply from practical use of the tools. Depending on how extensively users have to rely on the tools, there can also be big differences among the organizational units on how much knowledge about how the search and match functionalities work.

The way ELISE ranks results calls attention to the kind of materiality and agency that rankings possess [@pollockRankingDevicesSociomateriality2012]. That is, the way the system presents and ranks the results shapes how users make sense of the data and hence shapes their work practices. The prescribed behaviour [@akrichSummaryConvenientVocabulary1992] that users should input as much information as possible stands in opposition of users’ own experiences. When these users encounter unexpected results, they began developing their own heuristic techniques.

One possible improvement would be to add more explanations of why a result was included. Again, this is related to the particular way ELISE integrates with INDiGO. Other possible improvements could target cases such as where matches are found based on data that is not shown in the search results — e.g., the historical data mentioned in the quote above.

How and when duplicates are found is essential to further understand this process of deduplication. A first, more straightforward way, the department receives such deduplication requests can be through a manual demand from another department or organization. This can, for example, occur when an IND employee receives a document that they use to start looking for the customer. If they then find out that the person appears twice, they can request to turn those two records into one by filling in and submitting a form to T&I.

## Tropes

Finally, even more premises play a role on the side-lines. For example, looking at the way the company communicates about the technology also ‘narrate[s] the significance of technical artefacts’ [@suchmanConfiguration2014, p. 48]. Examples can be found in materials used by the company to promote their products and demonstrate why their products are important for their customers. The case of a mistake with variations of the name of the Boston Marathon bomber on a watchlist is a good example of this. Such tropes imagine scenarios of dramatic impacts of wrong decisions being taken due to incorrect, incomplete data. These kinds of narratives thus play a role in communicating the importance of the product, even if it is not always as effectively used in practice.
