# Configuring data matching

STS scholars have devised different approaches to examine and understand the relations between designers, users and technologies [@oudshoornHowUsersMatter2003], and thus how expectations of designers can be inscribed into devices of migration and border security. For example, the approach of script analysis was advanced to examine the assumed competences of users and affordances that are embedded in artefacts [@akrichDescriptionTechnicalObjects1992]. The script of an artefact then requires users to adopt designer’s envisaged behaviours and actions to interact with an artefact. This approach also allows for accounting for situations when those assumptions by artefact designers don’t match the actual uses and practices. In the context of border security, for instance, a biometric fingerprint scanner might have certain assumptions about bodies to make them legible [@kloppenburgSecuringIdentitiesBiometric2020a]. @woolgarConfiguringUserCase1990 furthermore noted how system designers might attempt to ‘configure the user’ of the system by incorporating the user into the sociotechnical system. The method to understand such configuration is by treating the computer systems as a text that is read by users and can be interpreted differently. Designers may thus attempt to anticipate and delimit this flexibility. In these views, a sociotechnical system functions well when users and the system are successfully configured together.

While notions such as ‘script’ and ‘configuring the user’ have been generative in understanding relations between users and technologies, they tend to overemphasize the role of certain actors such as designers [@oudshoornHowUsersMatter2003]. More recent approaches have therefore suggested to, for example, take a more longitudinal approach to examine important moments and sites of interactions in the life and entanglement of artefacts between users, designers, and other actors [@hyysaloNewProductionUsers2016]. Suchman [-@suchmanHumanmachineReconfigurationsPlans2007] furthermore argued that the inscriptions of users and uses are never that coherent, and that a more open-ended and indeterminate approach towards artefacts is required. Analyses of sociotechnologies of migration and border security should therefore include a wider range of actors and moments of design, development, deployment, use.

Configuration can, in accordance with Suchman’s view, also sensitize us to the material and discursive elements of software for dealing with data uncertainties. She distinguishes two broad uses: ‘First, as an aid to delineating the composition and bounds of an object of analysis, in part through the acknowledgement that doing so is integral not only to the study of technologies, but to their very existence as objects’ (ibid., p. 48). The software tools for searching and matching data, for instance, structures the way officials can find and access information about people, and set boundaries between them, such as their capacities for acting on searches and results. The second use she describes is in ‘in drawing our analytic attention to the ways in which technologies materialize cultural imaginaries, just as imaginaries narrate the significance of technical artefacts’ (ibid., p.48). In the case of data management such expectations may be in the way data quality uncertainties are thought to be resolved. For example, either by focusing attention on activities to detect and correct data issues, or by making systems directly cope with uncertainty in data [@keulenManagingUncertaintyRoad2012].

Following these approaches, this research aims to answer the question of what kinds of expectations and materialities are joined together in technologies for data management and reducing semantic uncertainty. Analysing and comparing the technical designs with actual uses, and thus also where they mismatch, can give evidence of the various expectations and assumptions at play. Yet, at the same time we should be both more specific to the situatedness of the design and keep a more open-ended and indeterminate view of how such technologies are put to use.